#Eccentrics and oddballs

If you are looking for somebody a bit odd among the *normal* citizens of Granada, you might not need to go further than yourself, even more so if you are wearing a cap with the bill sideways, flowery shirt open at the front, and the biggest eccentricity of them all: socks and sandals.

However, I am not talking about yourself, or not only about yourself, in this chapter. Not about the kind of person that [ends up with a Wikipedia page](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anexo:Personajes_destacados_de_Granada), although some of them, like Ángel Ganivet, were the kind of person that dives into a frozen river when they are far away from home. There are characters in the narrative of a city that, due to its presence in many acts, eventually become part, if not archetypes, of the city itself. These are the holy fools of yore and, nowadays, just people that you might know by name but, above that, by its behavior and the eccentricity that defines them. That is why I will not use their name, even if I know it.

Let us call the first one Randy, since he has got a vague similitude to the big philosopher and thinker [Randy Hickey](http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0017463/quotes), brother of Earl and sidekick in his adventure to restore his karma. Big and balding and sometimes using suspenders, his real name is the name of one of the saints that protect Granada. He can be seen around tapas time in the city center, wearing suspenders, and asking for cigarettes. Or smoking, if he already got one. Absolutely inoffensive, he can scare you off nonetheless by bumming cigarettes in a loud voice and unannounced.

We can call the next ones *the rosemary ladies*, since, indeed, I have no idea how they are called and they change from time to time, plus rosemary twigs are their weapon of choice. These are the women that offer you a rosemary twig near the entrance to the cathedral and, when you extend your hand to pick it up, grab your hand and start to read it as if they knew how to do that kind of thing, telling you obvious things, or not so obvious, and then requesting five or ten euros, depending on whether your look American or just the backpacker kind of tourist. They are not dangerous, but they can yell curses at you from a long distance, so better dodge them when you find them.

We also have our share of winos, which in Spain either drink openly from liter bottles of beer or sip from tetrapaks of supermarket plonk. For some reason, they gather around the Plaza de la Trinidad, at the tip of Paseo del Salón close to the bridge and also in Plaza Nueva. They fight sometimes, but they more pitiful than dangerous.

And on the other side of the law and among Granada's finest, a policeman that went [by the alias of Pavarotti](http://www.ideal.es/granada/20130206/local/granada/anecdotas-pitadas-pavarotti-201302061347.html) for no reason other than his having a beard, became also famous for his whistle. Traffic in Granada is notoriously deadlocked, and he used a special-order whistle to put a bit of order in that chaos. Only he apparently did it too much and too early, and some law professional living in the neighborhood took a notary home to measure the noise level and eventually sued him. It came to naught, but the local daily, the Ideal, received more than 30 letters to the director either loving or hating it.

>I can say myself he is a great professional. He was witness in an accident where a city bus ripped my rear-view mirror, and offered his help. When the insurance company came eventually around asking for his testimony, all was fixed and I got my car fixed. 

He was eventually [decorated in 2008](http://www.20minutos.es/noticia/339353/0/granada/condecora/pavarotti/), although later on he did not follow a strike along his colleagues and he was accused of scabbing and his gun stolen. He is probably still working, although his whistle has not been heard for some time now.

Historically, there have been other curious characters. The sometimes called [*Llorica*, sometimes *risicas*](http://purpuranevada.blogspot.com.es/2014/03/tengo-hambre-mucha-hambre_5.html), that is, either crybaby or smiley, was a beggar that worked the city center crying out, or maybe laughing, his hunger. I actually do not remember having ever seen him, but he has left his mark in several [literary journals](http://olvidos.es/pages/olvidos_de_granada_6).

Last but not least, there is a big university in Granada. There are nearly four thousand professors there, so you can expect eccentrics and oddballs galore. In order to experience them, you will have to sign for a course, which I encourage you to do, because it is the way thousands of people have experienced the city every year. You can then skip classes and just go to the Erasmus parties, since it is also the only way thousands of students have experienced the city every year.

>And I am not saying every single Erasmus student parties hard and does nothing else. There are more than a thousand students every year, so there is that kind, also the kind that parties hard and works hard, and then the kind that just works hard. Only this one is less noisy and keeps to itself, so the kinds noticed are the other two. 

