# Holy not-a-week

Most people think that the Holy Week is named so because it takes
pretty much the amount of days implied by the substantive *week*. Not
so. For people involved in it, it takes the whole year, and starts
right before the last parade of Easter Sunday has entered again the
temple, gates closed and hoods are ironed and hanged in the
closet. And chances are you are one of those people if you spend some
extended amount of time in Granada, willing or not. 

The fact that you can experience the Holy Week any time you want, and
also in many different places, explains why it is going to feel a
whole chapter here. I guess you have got the classic Holy Week
covered, right? You know, religious feeling, folks dressed in pointy
hoods, the incense, the bands, the gnarled figures of Christ in
plaster or wood, the Army soldiers escorting the floats in full
military regalia, including the assault guns. You haven't? Sorry,
nothing to see here then. Check out the Wikipedia and you're pretty
much done. Maybe I will add here that in Granada the whole thing is
not as famous as in most other Andalusian capitals, but it has got its
own peculiar brand, with famous brotherhoods running the streets of
the Sacromonte and the Alhambra at night. I have never watched them,
really, but I can imagine it. Feel free to do it, if you happen to be
in Granada during Holy Week proper.

You will probably also experience *something* after Holy Week that
stems directly from it. The mysterious screeching sound. First year I
owned a car, that might have been the 90s or so, a boxy second-hand
Talbot Horizon, driving around to work, I was young and unexperienced
and did not think I should have walked, anyway, that screeching sound
that was unlike anything I had seen before. I took it to the repair
shop and, lo and behold, they found nothing. Except for, that is, wax
in the tires. Many streets in Granada, and all the main ones, are
covered by wax pretty much in the area the car wheels turn. That
sticks to the wheel tires and makes that screeching sound when
turning. You can easily see it, a grayish-yellowish gunk that forms
rows close to the sidewalk. Which reminds me of another tradition,
which is collecting wax from candles during the processions; boys
create a core using tin foil or anything that can not be easily
melted, and put it
[right below the candles, where the wax falls](https://www.flickr.com/photos/guervos/3991990775/in/photolist-75KZMa-4zbnw7). The
brothers in the procession even stop to help them. That does not
prevent *all* wax from falling to the floor, obviously. It stays there
for a while and has to eventually be removed by the city hall, to the
tune of 300 kilos, to avoid
[motorbike accidents](http://www.granadadigital.es/atencion-motorista-cera-en-la-calzada/). 

That wax footprint lasts for a while, as well as the *removals* or
*traslados* of the floats from one church to another. Generally, the
images spend the year in a church or in the brotherhood house, but the
parades are not circular, they have to follow a particular route and
end up somewhere else. They stay in that place for some time, but
after Holy Week they have got to get back to their home base. Hence
the *traslados* which at one point in time were simply a bare float
with no flowers or anything, but now have their own ceremony and even
the
[local police warns about the route and stops traffic](https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1_cUVKYYkoVvsuAnfYPKsXYwXcyc&ll=37.17959935157143%2C-3.600744899999995&z=18). They
could take place up to a week after the Holy Week itself, at the same
time wax is being removed. 

Holy-week related parades will then stop for some time, although there
might be others of saints or virgins that are attended and joined
enthusiastically by *semanasanteros*. But let's say you are in Granada
some time in, for instance, early
November and want to see what the whole thing is about. You can check
the "home" of many of the brotherhoods. Why these figures have a
*home* outside an official church has many origins, including the fact
that in many cases brotherhoods started in the 17th and 16th century
as mutual help guilds; some brotherhoods are in fact known by the name
of the guild they traditionally belonged to, such as the "masons" or
the "tailors". But many brotherhoods originated in the 20th century,
and even the 21st century; when these have a "home", it is usually
because the brotherhood president fought with the parish priest and
they decided to split ways. It is very convenient, however, to keep
the *enseres* or paraphernalia that is paraded during Holy Week. 

There is one of them, for instance, in San Antón street; another one
in Santiago Street, just by the church of Santiago. You can visit them
usually during Sundays; they usually hold clubs or small gift shops,
manned by elderly ladies and selling candles or trading cards 

>This is probably not the proper way of calling them. One of the thing
>with holy week people is that they have names for everything. Flags
>are not flags, but pennants. Trading cards are not trading cards,
>but *escapularios*. The brotherhood president is called the *brother
>major*, and there are *waiters* and lots of jobs and things people
>sometimes put in their calling cards. 

These old ladies, usually volunteers, are an example of what is called
*capillita* or simply *semanasantero*, which we could loosely
translate as *holy week geek*. And that is really a thing. They have
their radio and TV programs, mostly in local stations, they discuss
every aspect and minutiae of how this brotherhood or that one matches
traditions or gives them a twist, and fret the whole year about the
weather during Holy Week, praying that there is not a drop of water
the day their float, which also has a name, *titular*, parades the
streets of Granada. You can recognize them by their sharp dress during
Holy Week and related holidays and abundance of insignia in their
lapels, indicating their rank and affiliations, same as Soviet
Generals, but generally a bit more trim. 

This is the dress code for the rest of the celebrations that dot the
whole year, which include sewing of flags, sorry, pennants, sorry,
*sinpecado* if it is somehow related to the Virgin Mary, presentation
of posters of the first float in the brotherhood, presentation of the
poster with the second float, presentation of a poster for the day the
brotherhood parades, for the whole week, for... well, you get the
idea. Lately, they have invented something called the *magna*, which
are thematic processions, as in "procession of all the Virgins that
have Anguish in their name". I do not know if there is one planned in
Granada, but they happen all over the place, in Madrid and Seville and
in many other places. If they have any religious or liturgical deep meaning
other than being kind of a theme park for holy week geeks and tourists
alike, I do not really know. 

By the beginning of the year there is also a street spectacle you
might bump into in many places, the rehearsals for carrying the floats
on shoulders. The *costaleros* are the ones in charge of that, and you
would think that it would be like, get there, walk when I tell you so,
stop when I tell you so also. It is absolutely not like that. You have
to measure the *costaleros* so that all the persons in the same beam
have pretty much the same height, you have to coordinate your step,
learn to kneel, to jump... Actually, those antics are spectacular
parts of the holy week that you might want to check out, maybe once or
twice. If you don't, check out these rehearsals. Not long ago there
was one in the roundabouts where the off ramps from the freeway
disgorge their charge of commuters. Besides watching the
deconstruction of carrying a parade, you can also check out how they
use boom boxes, they still do it sometime, or now more often,
BlueTooth speakers that reproduce the same music they will hear when
they do the real thing. By the side of the *costaleros* and as ragtag
army of brothers, sisters, boyfriends and girlfriends, you will see a
group of people tagging along, sometimes keeping the same steps of
those rehearsing under a big wooden table covered with sandbags.

In occasions, there will be accompanied by the band, although since
they are oh so noisy, they go separate ways and make rehearse their
*toques* or plays someplace far from civilization. There are several
disquieting things about the bands. The first is their taste for
dressing as hussars of the Austro-Hungarian empire. You see them
parading in the street in full military regalia and could think we had
been invaded by a particularly tasteful Central European Power. Not
only they have the caps, but also the strings, markings, boots, the
whole nine yards. This might be due to the fact that originally some
of them were actually military marching bands. Not so many guys in the
Army right now, so you have to settle for second-best: guys and girls dressed as
Gunga Din of the Light Brigade. I wonder why they don't dress as
empire stormtroopers or in urban camo, but I am pretty sure there has
been a discussion somewhere among a full circle of holy week geeks
discussing the pros and cons of urban vs. desert camo for this or that
band.

>I would have gone for desert. After all, Palestine is kind of a
>desert, right?

And don't get me started with bands dressed as Romans. There is none
in Granada proper, although there are small squads dressed the Roman
way, but there is one in my home town, Úbeda. They are
the best of the Holy Week hands down. They watch Ben Hur (the classic
one, obviously) and Gladiator endlessly looking for proper ways of
dressing, proper markings, and actual Roman slash Hollywood *toques*
or tunes to be played. Boy they are impressive, but I am afraid that
unless there is a Magna in Granada or a meeting of Roman bands, which,
yes, it is also a thing, you will not be able to check them out in
person. 

>You might want to go to Úbeda however on Easter Thursday, in the
>afternoon, to check it out.

A city official once confessed that holy week bands are actually the
most successful youth association  movement out there, with
almost 1000 persons engaged with something that, once again, is not
only a week. Most bands are available for hire and they have gigs all
over the province for this saint or that holiday or any parade that
needs a band, which are all of them. They have holy week standards,
and also local versions, and really they do their best. I know a bunch
of guys involved in this kind of thing, for which they earn peanuts,
maybe 50€ and a sandwich or pizza for a two or three hour parade, plus
the trip, and they really enjoy it, moving from one band to other as
soccer midfielders and also having a big rivalry with other bands
which they meet, sometimes, in little towns or just because they
happen to parade the same day. In some cases, they try to outplay the
other band by playing so loud that the other band starts to make
mistakes. Which is all good fun with the bugles and trumpets, not so with
drums when it can turn positively bloody when blisters burst. That blood,
and also doodles with the brotherhood logo and sometimes other
inscriptions are the decoration of some drum skins, that is, when they
are actually skins and not plastic. That will very much depend on how
much money the brotherhoods have, which is sometimes a lot.

Point of this chapter is twofold. First, look for the signs of
rehearsals, drums or bugles when you're walking in the evening in the
months before Semana Santa. Second, you are bound to meet it any time
of the year, because more than a religious time of penance it is
actually a cultural celebration with closer ties to the Carnival or to
being a football fan than anything else. And if you do, just let
yourself be carried by the crying sound of the bugles, and the
heartbeat of the drums, a samba by any other name. 

However, there is something about the Holy Week that makes it, at the
same time, on and off the beaten track at the same time. To tell you
the truth, although I get bored pretty quickly, a bit of checking it
out here and there does no harm and you might even enjoy
it. Yesterday, Holy Thursday, we were in a no-name square in the city
center, and the chariot with Christ tied to a column stopped in front
of us. The boss, when they were going to start again, said "Well,
guys, do your best because there is a square full of normal people,
and this is good enough for me." That they did, and we enjoyed the
chariot dancing, yes, that is weird, considering the subject, to the
tune of the religious-ish music from the Bengal lancers
look-alikes. He meant that they are pretty much obliged to do so in
front of the bleachers set in one of the main streets, which people,
well, mind you, not *normal* people as above, 
pay dearly to occupy. That is the beaten track, I guess. Instead of
sitting or staking a place in the sidewalk, which is an art by itself
and might need a whole chapter including anthropological studies on the
territoriality of the families and how their territory is marked by
sunflower seed husks, you can navigate lanes and streets and check it
out here and there, and then go to a quiet place and enjoy some wine
and tapas. 

Even if you do, there are some little details in the processions that
make them a microcosmos of Spanish culture. The presence of kids, in
the procession and outside, with their balled-up tin foil ready to
gather a big ball of wax, the dress and hairstyles people carry,
giving you the chance to se what is fashionable or not this year. In
some cases, yes, the devotion of people that spend 7 or 8 hours or
their lives in pumps or barefoot, following a procession. The presence
of the Army and police forces inside the procession, using sometimes
weaponry, like
the [Mauser M98](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gewehr_98), which can
rarely be seen anymore outside museums and some Afghan guerrilla. 

You might have to, anyway. During Holy Week, streets are diverted and
you can listen to the bands pretty much anywhere in town. Most
neighborhoods have their own little procession, so it might be
difficult to avoid, even more so if you are in the city center. You
will definitely meet one in the street if you go downtown to your
usual watering hole. So have a small dose, check it out with a
critical eye, and enjoy it because it is an interesting experience you
might not be able to see anywhere else. 
