#Malls, suburban and otherwise

Before there were even malls, there were *passages*, covered alleys filled with shops of many kinds. There were quite a few of them in Granada, and I used to visit them to buy, for instance, model planes or just to check out the immense variety of model trains and ships and wonderful stuff I might build, which I sometimes did, and hanged on the ceiling, and they woke me up once crashing down to the floor to become a pile of plastic pieces. All shops in that passage [closed in 2013](http://granadaimedia.com/la-decadencia-de-la-galeria-de-ganivet/), shuttering the last vestige of those galleries in Granada. 

You can still walk the Alcaicería, the most fake of *authentic* places in Granada. Between the Zacatín street and the cathedral, there is a small grid of streets filled with shops selling souvenirs made in China and managed by authentic people from Granada born elsewhere. You can still visit one, maybe two, places where authentic local woodcraft, called *taracea*, is made and sold; however, the best ones have moved to Elvira street, which looks pretty much the same except you have to dodge cars and marijuana smoke. Anyway, that Alcaicería, placed nowhere near where the actual *suq* was originally, was built in the 1920s as a sideshow to the general exposition in Seville, looking to attract visitors looking for the exotic and vaguely Arab-looking. It has become a fixture since then, and nobody from Granada will ever adventure further than Zacatín to buy anything there. 

>In one of the arcades, there was, for a long time, a shop selling popcorn, right at the entrance of one of the alleys. Definitely, there was no local who *did not* stop there for his fix of warm or tepid carbohydrates. It is also beautiful in the early morning, all shops closed, filled with local people purposefully walking to their day jobs, floor stones glittering sometimes with water used for cleaning them, smell from the cafeterias and churrerías in Bib-Rambla and bakeries around the city market wafting in from all places, quiet and romantic and serene unlike the bustle of the Gran Vía, just meters to one side. 

Anyway, that is beaten track central, and you are not looking for
that, but off the beaten track. You might then want to check out
*Centro Comercial Neptuno*, which is a mall, and is within walking
distance of the city center, and is practically haunted, with most
shops closed down and just a movie theater and a few bars surviving
from tweens meeting and millennials taking their kids to run there
when it is a foul day. It was the first mall ever opened in Granada,
not so long ago, as a response by local merchants to the onslaught
brought by the big department stores, Hipercor and Carrefour. These
can declare victory now without a doubt, because most shops have moved
back to the city or gone into oblivion, maybe looking for one of the
other malls that have opened all around the city. 

The final strike was the opening or yet other, bigger and better,
malls in some other places. First came Kinépolis, North of the city,
with a cineplex and Carrefour as its main poles of attraction. Then
came the curiously spelled Alhsur, South of the city and close to the
living quarters of many granadinos. Then came Serrallo Plaza, modern,
gleaming, more movie theaters, and that was the clinch, a Mercadona
and a Zara. You could shop for groceries, buy a tee, go to the movies
and then have something to eat in one of the franchises in the main
hall. Besides, these were local franchises, the Burger King relegated
to a corner of the hall, so you could feel patriotic in the middle of
an American-style space. 

>Since Serrallo Plaza opened, I have never returned to Alhsur. You can
>actually *walk* to Serrallo from the city center, walking up the
>Avenida de Cervantes. And check out other
>haunted mansions and some graffiti along the way, so have those
>chapters handy. 
