#Malls, suburban and otherwise

Before there were even malls, there were *passages*, covered alleys filled with shops of many kinds. There were quite a few of them in Granada, and I used to visit them to buy, for instance, model planes or just to check out the immense variety of model trains and ships and wonderful stuff I might build, which I sometimes did, and hanged on the ceiling, and they woke me up once crashing down to the floor to become a pile of plastic pieces. All shops in that passage [closed in 2013](http://granadaimedia.com/la-decadencia-de-la-galeria-de-ganivet/), shuttering the last vestige of those galleries in Granada. 

You can still walk the Alcaicería, the most fake of *authentic* places in Granada. Between the Zacatín street and the cathedral, there is a small grid of streets filled with shops selling souvenirs made in China and managed by authentic people from Granada born elsewhere. You can still visit one, maybe two, places where authentic local woodcraft, called *taracea*, is made and sold; however, the best ones have moved to Elvira street, which looks pretty much the same except you have to dodge cars and marijuana smoke. Anyway, that Alcaicería, placed nowhere near where the actual *suq* was originally, was built in the 1920s as a sideshow to the general exposition in Seville, looking to attract visitors looking for the exotic and vaguely Arab-looking. It has become a fixture since then, and nobody from Granada will ever adventure further than Zacatín to buy anything there. 

>In one of the arcades, there was, for a long time, a shop selling popcorn, right at the entrance of one of the alleys. Definitely, there was no local who *did not* stop there for his fix of warm or tepid carbohydrates. It is also beatiful in the early morning, all shops closed, filled with local people purposefully walking to their day jobs, floor stones glittering sometimes with water used for cleaning them, smell from the cafeterias and churrerías in Bib-Rambla and bakeries around the city market wafting in from all places, quiet and romantic and serene unlike the bustle of the Gran Vía, just meters to one side. 

Anyway, that is beaten track central, and you are not looking for that, but off the beaten track. You might then want to check out *Centro Comercial Neptuno*, which is a mall, and is within walking distance of the city center, and is practically haunted, with most shops closed down and just a movie theater and a few bars surviving from tweens meeting and millenials taking their kids to run there when it is a foul day. It was the first mall ever opened in Granada, not so long ago, as a response by local merchants to the onslaught brought by the big department stores, Hipercor and Carrefour. These can declare victory now withouth a doubt, because most shops have moved back to the city or gone into oblivion, maybe looking for one of the other malls that have opened all around the city. 
