# The (nearly abandoned) train station

If you are in Granada, it is as likely that you arrived by train as by cruise ship. Unless you happened to be in Seville and had a lot of time in your hands plus a real love for trains, it is quite unlikely that you took that mean of transport to enter Granada. In fact, even if you did, and you did it in the last few months, you would have arrived at the train station via riding a coach from Antequera, since the works preparing it for the AVE, the high speed train, have had it closed for the last few months of 2015.

But maybe you have arrived via AVE, which would be a good sign, first because it would mean that I have eventually finished this book, and second because it would mean that the AVE railway has, indeed, arrived eventually to Granada. And you might have noticed strange signs in that trip. For most of the trip, you will have the sun on your right or on your left, because it is going to be traveling south. However, when you arrive in Granada, the sun will play a trick and will change places, because you will be speeding towards the north-east. This is because the high-speed line looks like a mirror image of a J. The top will be in Madrid, the bottom of the J will be in Antequera, nicest station in the middle of nowhere, by the way, and the tail will end up in Granada. If you look at it from the other way, starting in Granada, it means that for around one hundred and odd kilometers you will be getting farther away from Madrid, not getting closer. All in all, it means that the high speed train will save half an hour, maybe a full hour, from the trip you could take in a slightly-disrespectful-of-the-speed-limits car.

There is probably a good reason for this, and there is one, or several, for the increasing neglect of the railroad in this part of Andalucía. As there must be one for the suppression of red-eye express services to Barcelona, daily services to Madrid, since there are only a couple now, and they take several hours. Once I decided to take a train from Granada to Valencia, which is a good five hours, coffee stops included, by car. It took nine hours, including a change of trains in Linares Baeza. It felt like traveling across time lines. 

I guess this is why I talk about this here. There is no track that has been less beaten than the railway tracks. It is probably worth the while, if you are interested in old machinery and utilitarian buildings, to visit the station. This station was called *Andaluces*, the name of the street it is now and the name of the private company that originally built it, and it was called that way because it was one of the two stations, separated by less than one kilometer, there were in Granada

>There was probably a good reason for this too.

There is something ilogical about this station, as said in a [study of the stations and depots in Andalucía](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estaci%C3%B3n_del_Sur_%28Granada%29). Even being a terminus station, because the trains do not go any further, it is built as a bypass station, with buildings and tickets booths to one side, instead of at the end of it.

>By now, I do not need to write it myself, but here I go: There is probably also a good reason for this. 

Walking along its berms, you can clearly snap pictures of the Alhambra, San Jerónimo and, to the other side, the bustle of the Camino de Ronda. It was [built by the beginning of the XXth century](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estaci%C3%B3n_de_Granada), and although it lacks the kitsch glamour of the stations of Córdoba or Jerez, its brick buildings remind the mudéjar architecture that can be found in the Albayzín. Plus it is an empty, quiet space, where you can find abandoned buildings and wagons, if that is the kind of thing you like. Much better in this shape than what was projected for its future, a [concrete monster designed by the architect Moneo](http://agraft.es/?p=468) which was fortunately scrapped during the crisis. Like the [Estación Sur](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estaci%C3%B3n_del_Sur_%28Granada%29), which I never knew and which is known today mainly as the last stop for the high-speed bus line, the LAC. If you stop there, make a right and then walk along the sidewalk up to the rail bridge, you will see on the left bit brick buildings that used to house that station. 

Maybe you will not. And the reason will not be that it is turned invisible, it is that it has been condemned and will probably be demolished in the near future. Which is a metaphor for the whole relationship between Granada and trains.


