#The best university in Granada

>There is only one university in Granada. So that thing above is a joke. Laughs accepted; in fact, they are compulsory. Thanks.

Granada is an university city, thanks mainly to the [UGR](http://ugr.university), which is one of the biggest in Spain and includes more than fifty thousand students. In a city with five times that population, that implies that Granada lives and breathes through its university. And that is literal in a sense: [almost 5% of the provincial income stems from the university](http://www.ideal.es/granada/v/20120503/granada/motores-granada-20120503.html) and eleven thousand jobs, which is 3.5% of the total employment in the province.

And that has happened for some time now, being also one of the oldest universities in Spain, so this is bound to have an impact on the city landscape. However, most of it is *in* the beaten track. 

So, off the top of my head, and outside that in-the-beaten track fact that some buildings are old and Gothic and venerable, university buildings are great resources for a couple of things: WiFi and lavatories.

>In fact, I am big fan of universities everywhere for the sanitary services they provide. When touristing, I always follow the old adage "Pee when you can, not when you want" so if you pass by an university building, just walk confidently in and look for the lavatories, in the corridor straight ahead and to your left.

Other than that, why would you want to go to the university? For starters, it might go to you instead. There are several campus and then independent buildings. Ciencias, for instance, is in a big campus called Fuentenueva which is close to the city center. Two faculties, Translation and Law, are independent, and old, and nice, buildings very close to downtown and the other monuments. Other campus, Aynadamar houses the closely related Fine Arts and Computer Science, while Cartuja houses the also closely related Pharmacy, Psychology, marketing and humanities. The recently built Health campus includes several high rises where Nursing and Medicine is taught, as well as a big, and so far unfinished, hospital, the morgue and several research campuses. It is really unlikely that you end up, by mistake, in the Faculty of Sports Sciences, but if you visit the Gothic structure of the Hospital Real, you can be seen from the windows of the university president office.

The university cafeterias are also good reasons for visiting any of them. The *café con leche* is awful but also awfully cheap, and there is great, funny and knowledgeable company. Every one of them has a library where old and dusty tomes are housed, and you can go through while you hide from the heat or if you actually are looking for a particular book. Check out [the catalog](http://biblioteca.ugr.es/pages/catalogo) in advance. Places like the Fine Arts library or the Letters and Humanities house a good amount of contemporary literature and essays.

Plus you might want to go because they house some jewels that are missed because they are, just like the rest of this book, off the beaten track. Check out, for instance, the Cartuja Campus. It hosts, except for pharmacy, mostly non-science or engineering degrees, and you can notice the atmosphere is much more relaxed and corridors much more crowded that the ones in Ciencias or Computer Science. If you are into interminable discussion that start with coffee and end somewhere you do not really know how you got, this is your place. Besides, their cafeterias, being on a hill, offer some of the best views in Granada. The one in the Faculty of Psychology has one of the best sunsets in Granada, plus excellent company. The Faculty of Economics has also an excellent outdoor terrace with very nice views of the city. And the cafeteria in Pharmacy is in a school with one of the highest female rate and, at the same time, the highest number of students in Granada. From there, the Odontology and Communications schools share the [Colegio Máximo](http://fcd.ugr.es/pages/facultad/colegio), originally a Jesuit novitiate, but now a monastery-like place with old printing machines in the corridors, low cost dental clinic and also a beautiful neomudéjar chapel that you will probably be able to visit if you ask nicely in reception; it is completely empty but its moorish revival decoration, stained glass windows and shell-like baptismal font are really remarkable and could be an incredible background to a rave party. The whole building, even if not ancient, is [remarkable](http://lastresgranadas.blogspot.com.es/2012/04/colegio-maximo-de-los-jesuitas-en.html) and was one of the first Jesuit buildings in the area that eventually included a lot. If you are *in* the beaten track and visiting the Cartuja, which is five hundred meters away, take a small detour and visit this place too.

Because there is art here, and Art with a capital A. The university holds contests for rewarding the art of its best students, and the prize is being a part of the Modern Art Collection of the University of Granada. If there is an index to that collection, I have been unable to find it. However, having been involved with the university for a few years, I know that paintings, photographs and sculptures end up in offices, corridors and stairs anywhere. There are three in the free software office, and feel free to come and appreciate them. We would happily give them to you, since they leave us a bit like this :-?, uncultured geeks as we are, only we cannot, because they are art and belong to the humankind in general, not me or you. In fact, of those pieces of art that looked like a irregular block of concrete with jagged iron bars coming out from it spent a long time as an ashtray in the old Computer Science school. The staff had to specifically instruct the cleaning crew to neither use it as a dustbin or carry it to a dumpster as a piece of debris. Which, I guess, eventually became since it disappeared one day, not to be seen again.

I am not saying that there are not incredibly talented master works; it is quite clear that all of them are. Only since I have not been able to find a catalog [except for this one](http://patrimonio3d.ugr.es/index.php/granada/pintura), which apparently lists only more classic works and not the modern ones, I cannot point out which ones are good enough for you or where they are, my dear reader.

If you walk into the administrative area of close to the lecture halls you will be unable to avoid the pictures with the former deans, dressed with the classic university attire, one that I have been unable to avoid just once, during a Honoris Causa celebration. Just so you know, the color of the band, which for some reason is called beca, same name as for grants in Spanish, depends on the degree or maybe doctorate you obtained. I go with blue, I think, although I am not sure, since blue is for Sciences and I am actually in an engineering School. Never mind. These guys will be looking their best with academic robes. I leave as an exercise for the reader to find out which is the dominant age and genre and how it varies from one Faculty to the next one.

Because every Faculty has its own little world and is not so much a cross section of the Spanish society as a sample of a particular intellectual, attitudinal and economical status. Check out Medicine, for instance, which is now housed in its very own white high rise, one you can see from the ring road. It needs an almost perfect grade to enter, close to 99%. It is the creme of the crop coming out of high schools in Granada which you can see there. Check out Fine Arts, too. Or Sports Sciences. They have to pass an special exam, besides requiring high grades in their A-levels, or Selectividad, which is its equivalent in Spain. We even have a Theology school, which, to tell you the truth, I have never visited. But back to Fine Arts, it is really worth a visit. Their library is excellently stocked with all kinds of media and arts texts. The building was a former madhouse built at the turn of the century, although the reforms and decoration include a couple of graffiti walls on the back. If you are in need of art supplies, it has a *economato* or student store where you can buy all kind of brushes, drawing pads and stuff needed for artistry. Its main building has an exhibition space used for works of arts by students and faculty.

>And once you are there, you can walk up the street to the other side of the roundabout and visit the ETSIIT, an important part of the geek chapter. Or use it as a warm-up to know about graffiti in Granada, since Fine Arts is at its core. 

For political consciousness and painted slogans on paper rolls, check out political science or philosophy. There are always political assemblies or organized protests going on there. But if you are more into economics, check the ecosystem that has evolved around the Faculties. Having a sparse campus has spread the wealth it brings to the city and there are all kinds of shops that cater to students: bookstores, cafés, copy shops, supplies... If you walk to the Architecture School, which is in the middle of El Realejo, [a former military hospital and house of the Admiral or Aragón built in the XVI century](https://prezi.com/r-rgq3hih_22/el-hospital-militar-de-granada-antiguo-palacio-del-almirant/), which lots of people in the region remember because it was where young ones with the age to serve where parked when they alleged some kind of ailment to be rid of the military service, has evolved from a bleak and drab barrack to a [functional, bright and light building that has received an architecture price](https://minutosdearquitectura.wordpress.com/2015/06/19/premio-arquitectura-2015-para-la-rehabilitacion-del-antiguo-hospital-militar-de-granada-de-victor-lopez-cotelo/), which is turning a former traditional and touristic neighborhood into a vibrant student area. Architecture, with its grim job outlook, accompanies now the Modern Languages Center, which is not strictly University but university-owned.

>Yes, it is complicated. But never mind, it quacks like an university, so let us let it be.

This place is the closest to an American-style college you will find here, mainly because the bulk of its students, coming here to learn Spanish, hail from the United States. That means flip-flops any time of the year, Jansport backpacks, and walking styrofoam cups from coffee-to-go places that cater precisely to this crowd and nobody else, since any self-respecting Spaniard will have a proper sit-down coffee with olive-oiled toast on the side.





