# Water

I did not intend to make this (book,pamphlet,guide,loose collection of
words ← choose one or several or none) a sensory experience with all,
or a few, senses explored in their very own chapters. In fact there is
a old Spanish ditty that goes

	Dale limosna, mujer
	Que no hay en la vida nada
	Como la pena de ser
	Ciego en Granada

Loosely translated as

	Yo, woman, give him the alms
	Because there is nothing in life
	Like the sorrow of being
	A blind man in Granada

It would be also a real pity if you did not have the pleasure of
tasting tap water in Granada. And that is something I have found
rather late in life. Many people prefer the water they have palated in
their hometown. But in Úbeda, were I was born and raised, water
carried so much lime that taps had to be routinely cleansed and
showers dug out of the calcareous aglomeration they carried. Even so,
it was not like I was getting out of Úbeda and saying, every time I
drank a glass of water, "Hey, this is the stuff".

That happens to me when I get out of Granada. Really. The first time
you stop at a roadside café, two hours into foreign territory, and, it
is all "what the hell, they call *this* water?".

>Except in Vienna. They have wonderful tap water there. So wonderful
>that they created a monument to it right in front of the monument to
>the soviet soldier that they wanted to hide. But that is a completely
>different story.

Tap water, everywhere in and around Granada, is really good. It is cool
and fresh and does not have the tang of chemicals used in
purification. Plus it is really safe. Mostly everywhere in Europe,
really, but the taste and flavor will vary. It is really much better
than most el cheapo bottled water and it comes very close to Lanjarón
water from which it is not too different.

I guess the trick is that it comes fresh from the reservoirs that take
water directly from Sierra Nevada. In
[Canales](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embalse_de_Canales), which you
can visit and I encourage you to do so, it is a few kilometers away
from Granada and close to Güéjar Sierra, nice place to eat and to just be,

>It is also the reason why, or one of them at least, why there are no
>tram from Granada to the Sierra. That, too, is a different story.

and [Quéntar](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embalse_de_Qu%C3%A9ntar)
water does not have a long run from the snow and ice of the Sierra, so
it is pristine when it, eventually, arrives to your glass.

You will not probably be able to take it home, but its taste (or
complete absence) is
something that will linger on for a long time. Guaranteed.
