#Brothels and whorehouses

Let us be clear here. I am not encouraging you to visit *the inside* of this kind of places. You are obviously free to do so, and I will remain non-judgmental about it, but this chapter is not intended as an encouragement to the kind of behaviors that made this kind of establishments possible in the first place.

However, this is an off the beaten track kind of book. You must acknowledge that Lonely Planet does not include a *lewd* route in their otherwise excellent guides or that Fodor's gives one, two or three stars to kinky houses. So it is our turn to look at them from a cultural point of view and how they contribute to the overall image of the city. Besides, prostitution in Granada has been the [topic of a book that was going to be published by a scholar in the university](http://www.granadahoy.com/article/granada/540676/geografia/la/prostitucion/granada.html), although it eventually became [just an article](http://www.rigys.org/estudio/0197.pdf), which you can download and read yourself.

>You might want to argue against the main hypothesis of that work: that women in that trade cannot leave it because "they are addicted to money". 

First thing that characterizes them is neon. Since we are an old country, we do not care about this newish things that are the subject of [podcasts and history books elsewhere](http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/tube-benders/). But most people and every truck driver in Spain knows that if that colored neon by the roadside is a milestone that indicates a place where you can get your rocks off. So to find them in Granada you will mostly have to drive and do it by night. There are a couple that are withing walking distance of the city itself, and they bear almost the same name: Don Pepe and Don José. There quite a few more if you do some perfunctory search in Google, although maybe you should not do that; however, the first one run at one particular point in time radio ads, and the second one can be clearly seen if you travel South through the freeway in a strip mall between Granada and Armilla, right next to a wok buffet, a sporting goods store, and Toys'r'us. The usual place where you can find this kind of things, in short.

Would you want to go there and take a few pictures from the outside?

>If you do it, be discrete and if some burly dressed in black guy comes up to you, run back to your car and speed away.

Well, why not? Amsterdam red-light district, although at times looks like a Disneyfication of sexploitation, is a big attraction, the same as the Reeperbahn in Hamburg and other seedy places all over the world, including Times Square in the eighties. You can go, buy cheap sports t-shirts and then turn around the corner and sneak a picture of the neon signs, which, anywhere in the world, imply decadence and shabbiness. A seediness that might not be something to be proud of, but that can be otherwise put to work by creating alternative places to visit in the city. Which is what this book is all about.

There are also some places where you can watch the sex traders of the peripatetic variety. Which, of course, almost includes the word *pathetic* in it, so I guess it is the kind of thing that it is better to avoid completely. However, sometimes it is just impossible to do it. You walk down the street, and here you have a score of scantily clad women, separated by a preestablished and regular number of meters, and generally walking up and down the kerb to stave off the night chill. Not so long ago, when the buses stopped running in Paseo del Salón, it was one place where they could be seen; this is mentioned too in the study linked above. It is close to a park, which is a convenient place to perform the service. Empty spaces, consequences of the real estate bubble, are probably the environment of the other areas: Almanjáyar and Jaén road. However, the first area has now no vehicle traffic, except for bikes and skates, and the second has been gentrified, or rather strip-malled, with the addition of fast-food joints, a hotel and heavy traffic going to nearby malls. So it is difficult to say where they are now.

It is also impossible to say where they will be in the moment you read this. Except for the Don Pepe and Don José, which will last as least as much as the Alhambra. 
